.\" Process this file with
.\" groff -man -Tascii opusrtp.1
.\"
.TH opusrtp 1 2019-09-07 "Xiph.Org Foundation" "opus-tools"
.SH NAME
opusrtp \(en transmit or receive an Opus audio RTP stream
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B opusrtp
[
.I transmit-options
]
.I in.opus ...
.PP
.B opusrtp
.B --sniff
.I device
[
.I receive-options
]
.PP
.B opusrtp
.B --extract
.I in.pcap
[
.I receive-options
]
.PP
.B opusrtp
.B --help
.PP
.B opusrtp
.B --version
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B opusrtp
is an experimental tool to transmit and receive Opus audio RTP streams,
used for interactive applications on the internet.
.SH OPTIONS
.SS "General options"
.TP
.BR -h ", " --help
Show command help.
.TP
.BR -V ", " --version
Show version information.
.SS "Transmit options"
.TP
\fB-d\fR, \fB--destination\fR \fIaddr\fR
Set destination IP address (default: 127.0.0.1).
.TP
\fB-p\fR, \fB--port\fR \fIN\fR
Set destination port (1\(en65535, default: 1234).
.TP
\fB-t\fR, \fB--type\fR \fIN\fR
Set RTP payload type (0\(en127, default: 120).
.SS "Receive options"
.TP
\fB--sniff\fR \fIdevice\fR
Sniff the network device for active RTP sessions, which can be
useful for debugging other Opus RTP implementations.  This may
require superuser privileges.
.TP
\fB-e\fR, \fB--extract\fR \fIin.pcap\fR
Extract from input pcap file.
.TP
\fB-p\fR, \fB--port\fR \fIN\fR
Set destination port to capture (1\(en65535). By default, the first plausible
port number that is seen is captured.
.TP
\fB-t\fR, \fB--type\fR \fIN\fR
Set RTP payload type to capture (0\(en127). By default, the first plausible
dynamic payload type (96\(en127) that is seen is captured.
.TP
\fB-o\fR, \fB--output\fR \fIout.opus\fR
Write Ogg Opus output file.
.TP
\fB-r\fR, \fB--rate\fR \fIN\fR
Set original sample rate in Ogg Opus output file (default: 48000).
.TP
\fB-c\fR, \fB--channels\fR \fIN\fR
Set channel count in Ogg Opus output file (default: 2).
.SH AUTHORS
Ralph Giles <giles@thaumas.net>
.SH BUGS
The receive mode does not support out-of-order or missing packets,
multiple simultaneous RTP streams with the same destination port
number and payload type, or normal unicast and multicast receive.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR opusdec (1),
.BR opusenc (1),
.BR opusinfo (1)
