.\" Process this file with
.\" groff -man -Tascii opusinfo.1
.\"
.TH opusinfo 1 2019-09-07 "Xiph.Org Foundation" "opus-tools"
.SH NAME
opusinfo \(en display information and perform validity checks on Opus files
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B opusinfo
[
.B -q
|
.B -v
] [
.B -h
] [
.B -V
]
.I file.opus
.B ...
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B opusinfo
reads one or more Opus files and prints information about stream contents
(including chained and/or multiplexed streams) to standard output. It will
detect (but not correct) a wide range of common defects, with many
additional checks specifically for Opus streams.
.PP
For all stream types
.B opusinfo
will print the filename being processed, the stream serial numbers, and various
common error conditions.
.PP
For
.B Opus
streams, information including the version used for encoding, number of
channels and other header information, the bitrate and playback length,
the contents of the comment header, and general statistics about the
stream are printed.
.PP
Opusinfo is a fork of \fBogginfo\fR(1) with the non-Opus parts largely removed.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B -h
Show command help.
.TP
.B -q
Quiet mode. This may be specified multiple times. Doing so once will remove
the detailed informative messages; twice will remove warnings as well.
.TP
.B -v
Verbose mode. At the current time, this does not do anything.
.TP
.B -V
Show version information.
.SH NOTES
There are many kinds of errored, invalid, non-normative, or otherwise
unwise stream constructions for which opusinfo will not produce warnings.
Passing opusinfo with flying colors is not certification of the
correctness of a stream. Future versions may detect more error
conditions.
.SH AUTHORS
Michael Smith <msmith@xiph.org>
.PP
Gregory Maxwell <greg@xiph.org>
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR opusdec (1),
.BR opusenc (1)
